

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
1.1 Types of Machine Learning Systems 
At a broad level, machine learning can be classified into four types: 
 
Fig1: Types of Machine Learning Techniques 
 
1. Supervised learning 
2. Unsupervised learning 
3. Semi supervised learning 
4. Reinforcement learning 
 
1) Supervised Learning 
Supervised learning is a type of machine learning method in which we provide sample labeled 
data to the machine learning system in order to train it, and on that basis, it predicts the output. 
The system creates a model using labeled data to understand the datasets and learn about each 
data, once the training and processing are done then we test the model by providing a sample 
data to check whether it is predicting the exact output or not. 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
For Example: 
• Let us consider images that are labeled a spoon or a knife. This known data is fed to the 
machine, which analyzes and learns the association of these images based on its features 
such as shape, size, sharpness, etc.  
• Now when a new image is fed to the machine without any label, the machine is able to 
predict accurately that it is a spoon with the help of the past data.  
 
Fig2: Example for Supervised learning algorithm 
The  goal  of  supervised  learning  is  to  map  input  data  with  the  output  data.  The  supervised 
learning is  based  on  supervision, and it  is  the same  as when a student learns things in the 
supervision of the teacher. The example of supervised learning is spam filtering.  
Supervised learning can be grouped further in two categories of algorithms: 
o Classification 
o Regression 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RKR21 
 
 
Classification - Supervised Learning
• Classification is used when the output variable 
•  For example, yes or no, male or female, true or false, etc. 
 
Example: Spam Filtering 
• In order to predict whether a mail is spam or not, we need to first teach the machine what 
a spam mail is. 
•  This is done based on a lot of spam filters 
the mail header, and then searching if it contains any false information. 
• Certain keywords and blacklist filters that blackmails are used from already blacklisted 
spammers. 
• All of these features are used to score the mail and give it a spam score. The lower the 
total spam score of the email, the more likely that it is not a scam.
• Based on the content, label, and the spam score of the new incoming mail, the algorithm 
decides whether it should land in the inbox or spam folder.
 
 
 
 IML 
Supervised Learning 
Classification is used when the output variable is categorical i.e. with 2 or more classes.
For example, yes or no, male or female, true or false, etc.  
Fig3: Example for classification 
whether a mail is spam or not, we need to first teach the machine what 
This is done based on a lot of spam filters - reviewing the content of the mail, reviewing 
the mail header, and then searching if it contains any false information. 
rtain keywords and blacklist filters that blackmails are used from already blacklisted 
All of these features are used to score the mail and give it a spam score. The lower the 
total spam score of the email, the more likely that it is not a scam. 
Based on the content, label, and the spam score of the new incoming mail, the algorithm 
decides whether it should land in the inbox or spam folder. 
 II/I ALL BRANCHES 
i.e. with 2 or more classes. 
 
whether a mail is spam or not, we need to first teach the machine what 
reviewing the content of the mail, reviewing 
the mail header, and then searching if it contains any false information.  
rtain keywords and blacklist filters that blackmails are used from already blacklisted 
All of these features are used to score the mail and give it a spam score. The lower the 
Based on the content, label, and the spam score of the new incoming mail, the algorithm 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
Regression - Supervised Learning 
• Regression is used when the output variable is a real or continuous value. In this case, 
there is a relationship between two or more variables i.e., a change in one variable is 
associated with a change in the other variable. 
•  For example, salary based on work experience or weight based on height, etc.  
Example: humidity and temperature 
 
Fig4: Example for Regression 
Let’s consider two variables -humidity and temperature. Here, ‘temperature’ is the independent 
variable and ‘humidity' is the dependent variable. If the temperature increases, then the humidity 
decreases.  
These two variables are fed to the model and the machine learns the relationship between them. 
After the machine is trained, it can easily predict the humidity based on the given temperature.  
Some of the supervised learning applications are: 
 Sentiment analysis (Twitter, Facebook, Netflix, YouTube, etc) 
 Natural Language Processing 
 Image classification 
 Predictive analysis 
 Pattern recognition 
 Spam detection 
 Speech/Sequence processing 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
Supervised Learning: Uses 
• Prediction of future cases: Use the rule to predict the output for future inputs 
• Knowledge extraction: The rule is easy to understand 
• Compression: The rule is simpler than the data it explains 
• Outlier detection: Exceptions that are not covered by the rule, e.g., fraud 
Supervised Learning: Limitations 
 Slow -it requires human experts to manually label training examples one by one 
 Costly -a model should be trained on the large volumes of hand-labeled data to provide 
accurate predictions. 
 
2) Unsupervised Learning 
Unsupervised learning is a learning method in which a machine learns without any supervision. 
The training is provided to the machine with the set of data that has not been labeled, classified, 
or categorized, and the algorithm needs to act on that data without any supervision. The goal of 
unsupervised learning is to restructure the input data into  new features  or  a  group  of  objects 
with similar patterns. 
Example: 
• Let's take a similar example as before, but this time we do not tell the machine whether 
it's a spoon or a knife.  
• The  machine  identifies  patterns  from  the  given  set  and  groups  them  based  on  their 
patterns, similarities, etc.  
 Fig5: Example for Unsupervised Learning 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
 
In unsupervised learning, we don't have a predetermined result. The machine tries to find useful 
insights  from  the  huge  amount  of  data.  It  can  be  further  classifieds  into  two  categories  of 
algorithms: 
o Clustering 
o Association 
Clustering - Unsupervised Learning 
• Clustering is the method of dividing the objects into clusters that are similar between 
them and are dissimilar to the objects belonging to another cluster.  
• For example, finding out which customers made similar product purchases.  
Example:
 
Fig6: Example for Clustering 
• Suppose  a  telecom  company  wants  to  reduce  its  customer  churn  rate  by  providing 
personalized call and data plans.  
• The behavior of the customers is studied and the model segments the customers with 
similar traits.  
• Group A customers use more data and also have high call durations. Group B customers 
are heavy Internet users, while Group C customers have high call duration. 
•  So, Group B will be given more data benefit plants, while Group C will be given cheaper 
called call rate plans and group A will be given the benefit of both.  

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
Association - Unsupervised Learning 
• Association is a rule-based  machine  learning to discover the probability of the co-
occurrence of items in a collection. 
•  For example, finding out which products were purchased together. 
Example: 
 
Fig7: Example for Association 
• Let’s say that a customer goes to a supermarket and buys bread, milk, fruits, and wheat. 
Another customer comes and buys bread, milk, rice, and butter. 
•  Now, when another customer comes, it is highly likely that if he buys bread, he will buy 
milk too. 
•  Hence, a relationship is established based on customer behavior and recommendations 
are made.  
 
Uses of Unsupervised Learning 
• Unsupervised  learning  is  used  for  more  complex  tasks  as  compared  to  supervised 
learning because, in unsupervised learning, we don't have labeled input data. 
• Unsupervised learning is preferable as it is easy to get unlabeled data in comparison to 
labeled data. 
 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
Unsupervised Learning- Limitations 
• It has a limited area of applications, mostly for clustering purposes. 
• It provides less accurate results. 
An example of a clustering algorithm is k-Means where k refers to the number of clusters to 
discover in the data.  
Unsupervised Learning applications are: 
1. Similarity detection 
2. Automatic labeling 
3. Object segmentation (such as Person, Animal, Films) 
The goal in such unsupervised learning problems may be to discover groups of similar examples 
within the data, where it is called clustering, or to determine the distribution of data within the 
input space, known as density estimation, or to project the data from a high-dimensional space 
down to two or three dimensions for the purpose of visualization. 
 
3) Semi-Supervised Learning 
Semi-supervised  learning is  supervised  learning  where  the  training  data  contains  very  few 
labeled examples and a large number of unlabeled examples. 
The goal of a semi-supervised learning model is to make effective use of all of the available data, 
not just the labeled data like in supervised learning. 
 
Fig8: Example for Semi supervised Learning 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
• Semi-supervised learning is an important category that lies between the Supervised and 
Unsupervised machine learning.  
• To  overcome  the  drawbacks  of  supervised  learning  and  unsupervised  learning 
algorithms, the concept of Semi-supervised learning is introduced.  
• Labeled data exists with a very small amount while it consists of a huge amount of 
unlabeled data.  
• Initially, similar data is clustered along with an unsupervised learning algorithm, and 
further, it helps to label the unlabeled data into labeled data.  
• It is why label data is a comparatively, more expensive acquisition than unlabeled data.  
 “Semisupervised”  learning  attempts  to  improve  the  accuracy  of  supervised  learning  by 
exploiting information in unlabeled data. This sounds like magic, but it can work! 
Real-world applications of Semi-supervised Learning 
• Speech Analysis 
• Web content classification 
• Protein sequence classification 
• Text document classifier 
 
4) Reinforcement Learning 
Reinforcement learning is learning what to do — how to map situations to actions—so as to 
maximize a numerical reward signal. The learner is not told which actions to take, but instead 
must discover which actions yield the most reward by trying them. 
 
Terms used in Reinforcement Learning 
 
• Environment — Physical world in which the agent operates 
• State              — Current situation of the agent 
• Reward         — Feedback from the environment 
• Policy           — Method to map agent’s state to actions 
• Value            — Future reward that an agent would receive by taking an action in a 
particular state 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
Reinforcement learning is a feedback-based learning method, in which a learning agent gets a 
reward  for  each  right  action  and  gets  a  penalty  for  each  wrong  action.  The  agent  learns 
automatically with these feedbacks and improves its performance. In reinforcement learning, the 
agent interacts with the environment and explores it. The goal of an agent is to get the most 
reward points, and hence, it improves its performance. 
The  robotic  dog,  which  automatically  learns  the  movement  of  his  arms,  is  an  example  of 
Reinforcement learning. 
An example of a reinforcement problem is playing a game where the agent has the goal of 
getting  a  high  score  and  can  make  moves  in  the  game  and  received  feedback  in  terms  of 
punishments or rewards. 
 
 
Fig9: Example for Reinforcement learning 
In many complex domains, reinforcement learning is the only feasible way to train a program to 
perform at high levels. For example, in game playing, it is very hard for a human to provide 
accurate and consistent evaluations of large numbers of positions, which would be needed to 
train an evaluation function directly from examples. Instead, the program can be told when it has 
won or lost, and it can use this information to learn an evaluation function that gives reasonably 
accurate estimates of the probability of winning from any given position. 
• Suppose there is an AI agent present within a maze environment, and his goal is to find 
the diamond.  

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
• The agent interacts with the environment by performing some actions, and based on those 
actions, the state of the agent gets changed, and it also receives a reward or penalty as 
feedback.  
• The agent continues doing these three things (take  action,  change  state/remain  in  the 
same  state,  and  get  feedback), and by doing these actions, he learns and explores the 
environment. 
• The agent learns that what actions lead to positive feedback or rewards and what actions 
lead to negative feedback penalty.  
• As a positive reward, the agent gets a positive point, and as a penalty, it gets a negative 
point. 
Table1: Comparison of Machine Learning Techniques 
 
Parameters 
Supervised 
Learning 
Unsupervised 
Learning 
Semi-Supervised 
Learning 
Reinforcement 
Learning 
Definition 
Learns by using 
labeled data 
Trained using 
unlabeled data 
without any 
guidance 
Trained using 
both labeled& 
unlabeled data 
Works on 
interacting with 
the environment 
Type of data 
Labeled data     Unlabeled data Both 
No –predefined 
data 
Type of 
problems 
Regression and 
classification 
Association and 
Clustering 
Classification and 
Regression 
Exploitation or 
Exploration 
Supervision 
Yes No  No supervision 
Algorithms 
Linear Regression, 
Logistic Regression, 
SVM, KNN etc. 
K –Means 
Text document 
classifier 
Q –Learning, 
SARSA 
Aim 
Calculate outcomes 
Discover 
underlying 
patterns 
Classify the data 
and also 
discovers 
underlying 
patterns 
Learn a series of 
action 
Application 
Risk Evaluation, 
Forecast Sales 
Recommendation 
System, 
Anomaly 
Detection 
Text 
Classification 
Self Driving 
Cars, Gaming, 
Healthcare 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
1.4 Batch and Online Learning 
Batch  learning represents the training of machine learning models in a batch manner. In other 
words, batch learning represents the training of the models at regular intervals such as weekly, 
bi-weekly, monthly, quarterly, etc. The data gets accumulated over a period of time. The models 
then get trained with the accumulated data from time to time at periodic intervals.  
Batch learning is also called offline learning. The models trained using batch or offline learning 
are moved into production only at regular intervals based on the performance of models trained 
with new data.  
 
Fig10: Process of Batch Learning 
Building offline models or models trained in a batch manner requires training the models with 
the entire training data set. Improving the model performance would require re-training all over 
again with the entire training data set. These models are static in nature which means that once 
they get trained; their performance will not improve until a new model gets re-trained. Offline 
models or models trained using batch learning are deployed in the production environment by 
replacing the old model with the newly trained model. 
 
 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
There can be various reasons why we can choose to adopt batch learning for training the models. 
Some of these reasons are the following: 
 The business requirements do not require frequent learning of models.  
 The data distribution is not expected to change frequently. Therefore, batch learning is 
suitable. 
 The software systems (big data) required for batch learning is not available due to various 
reasons including the cost. The fact that the model is trained with a lot of accumulated 
data takes a lot of time and resources (CPU, memory space, disk space, disk I/O, network 
I/O, etc.).  
 The expertise required for creating the system for incremental learning is not available.  
If the models trained using batch learning needs to learn about new data, the models need to be 
retrained using the new data set and replaced appropriately with the model already in production 
based on different criteria such as model performance. The whole process of batch learning can 
be automated as well. The disadvantage of batch learning is it takes a lot of time and resources to 
re-training the model. 
The criteria based on which the machine learning models can be decided to train in a batch 
manner depends on the model performance. Red-amber-green statuses can be used to determine 
the health of the model based on the prediction accuracy or error rates. Accordingly, the models 
can be chosen to be retrained or otherwise.  
The following stakeholders can be involved in reviewing the model performance and leveraging 
batch learning: 
 Business/product owners 
 Product managers 
 Data scientists 
 ML engineers  
In online learning, the training happens in an incremental manner by continuously feeding data 
as it arrives or in a small group. Each learning step is fast and cheap, so the system can learn 
about new data on the fly, as it arrives. 
 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
Online  learning is  great  for  machine  learning  systems  that  receive  data  as  a  continuous 
flow (e.g., stock prices) and need to adapt to change rapidly or autonomously. It is also a good 
option if you have limited computing resources: once an online learning system has learned 
about new data instances, it does not need them anymore, so you can discard them (unless you 
want to be able to roll back to a previous state and “replay” the data) or move the data to another 
form of storage (warm or cold storage) if you are using the data lake. This can save a huge 
amount of space and cost.  
 
Fig11: Process of Online Learning 
Online learning algorithms can also be used to train systems on huge datasets that cannot fit in 
one machine’s main memory (this is also called out-of-core learning). The algorithm loads part 
of the data runs a training step on that data and repeats the process until it has run on all of the 
data. 
One of the key aspects of online learning is the learning rate. The rate at which you want your 
machine learning to adapt to new data set is called the learning rate. A system with a high 
learning rate will tend to forget the learning quickly. A system with a low learning rate will be 
more like batch learning. 
One of the big disadvantages of an online learning system is that if it is fed with bad data, the 
system will have bad performance and the user will see the impact instantly. Thus, it is very 
important to come up with appropriate data governance strategy to ensure that the data fed is of 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
high quality. In addition, it is very important to monitor the performance of the machine learning 
system in a very close manner.  
The following are some of the challenges for adopting an online learning method: 
 Data governance 
 Model governance includes appropriate algorithm and model selection on-the-fly 
Online models require only a single deployment in the production setting and they evolve over a 
period of time. The disadvantage that the online models have is that they don’t have the entire 
dataset available for the training. The models are trained in an incremental manner based on the 
assumptions made using the available data and the assumptions at times can be sub-optimal. 
 
Online learning vs Batch learning 
Complexity 
More complex because the model 
keeps evolving over time as more 
data becomes available. 
Less complex because the model is 
fed with more consistent data sets 
periodically. 
Computational  
power 
More computational power is 
required because of the continuous 
feed of data that leads to continuous 
refinement. 
Less computational power is needed 
because data is delivered in batches; 
the model isn’t continuously refining 
itself. 
Use in production 
Harder to implement and control 
because the production model 
changes in real-time according to 
its data feed. 
Easier to implement because offline 
learning provides engineers with 
more time to perfect the model 
before deployment. 
Applications 
Used in applications where new 
data patterns are constantly 
required (e.g., weather prediction 
tools, Stock market predictions) 
Used in applications where data 
patterns remain constant and don’t 
have sudden concept drifts (e.g., 
image classification) 
Table2: Comparison of Online learning vs Batch learning 
 