

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
1.1 Introduction of Machine Learning  
 
Machine Learning is the field of study that gives computers the capability to learn without 
being explicitly programmed. As it is evident from the name, it gives the computer that makes it 
more similar to humans: The ability to learn.  
Machine learning is a branch of artificial intelligence and computer science which focuses on the 
use  of  data  and  algorithms  to  imitate  the  way  that  humans  learn,  gradually  improving  its 
accuracy. 
A subset of machine learning is closely related to computational statistics, which focuses on 
making predictions using computers; but not all machine learning is statistical learning. The 
study of mathematical optimization delivers methods, theory and application domains to the field 
of machine learning. Machine learning is an important component of the growing field of data 
science. Through the use of statistical methods, algorithms are trained to make classifications or 
predictions. 
 
Fig1: Machine Learning 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
 
In 1997, Tom Mitchell gave a “well-posed” mathematical and relational definition for Machine 
Learning as, “A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to some task T 
and some performance measure P, if its performance on T, as measured by P, improves with 
experience E.  
 
Fig2: Definition of Machine Learning 
 
Definitions in Machine Learning:  
• Algorithm: A Machine Learning algorithm is a set of rules and statistical techniques 
used to learn patterns from data and draw significant information from it. It is the logic 
behind a Machine Learning model.  
An example of a Machine Learning algorithm is, the Linear Regression algorithm. 
• Model: A model is the main component of Machine Learning. A model is trained by 
using a Machine Learning Algorithm. An algorithm maps all the decisions that a model is 
supposed to take based on the given input, in order to get the correct output. 
• Predictor Variable: It is a feature(s) of the data that can be used to predict the output. 
• Response Variable: It is the feature or the output variable that needs to be predicted by 
using the predictor variable(s). 
• Training  Data: The  Machine  Learning  model  is  built  using  the  training  data.  The 
training data helps the model to identify key trends and patterns essential to predict the 
output. 

RKR21 
 
• Testing Data: After the model is trained, it must be tested to evaluate how accurately it 
can predict an outcome. This is done by the testing data set.
 
Machine Learning Process
Step 1: Define the objective of the Problem Statement
At this step, we must understand what exactly needs to be predicted. In our 
to predict the possibility of rain by studying weather conditions. At this stage, it is also essential 
to take mental notes on what kind of data can be used to solve this problem or the type of 
approach you must follow to get to the 
 IML 
After the model is trained, it must be tested to evaluate how accurately it 
predict an outcome. This is done by the testing data set. 
Fig3: Flow of Machine Learning 
Machine Learning Process: 
Fig4: Process of Machine Learning 
Define the objective of the Problem Statement 
At this step, we must understand what exactly needs to be predicted. In our 
to predict the possibility of rain by studying weather conditions. At this stage, it is also essential 
to take mental notes on what kind of data can be used to solve this problem or the type of 
approach you must follow to get to the solution. 
 II/I ALL BRANCHES 
After the model is trained, it must be tested to evaluate how accurately it 
 
 
At this step, we must understand what exactly needs to be predicted. In our case, the objective is 
to predict the possibility of rain by studying weather conditions. At this stage, it is also essential 
to take mental notes on what kind of data can be used to solve this problem or the type of 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
Step 2: Data Gathering 
At this stage, you must be asking questions such as, 
 What kind of data is needed to solve this problem? 
 Is the data available? 
 How can I get the data? 
Once you know the types of data that is required, you must understand how you can derive this 
data. Data collection can be done manually or by web scraping. However, if you’re a beginner 
and you’re just looking to learn Machine Learning you don’t have to worry about getting the 
data. There are 1000s of data resources on the web, you can just download the data set and get 
going. 
Coming back to the problem at hand, the data needed for weather forecasting includes measures 
such as humidity level, temperature, pressure, locality, whether or not you live in a hill station, 
etc. Such data must be collected and stored for analysis. 
Step 3: Data Preparation 
The  data  you  collected  is  almost  never  in  the  right  format.  You  will  encounter  a  lot  of 
inconsistencies in the data set such as missing values, redundant variables, duplicate values, etc. 
Removing  such  inconsistencies  is  very  essential  because  they  might  lead  to  wrongful 
computations  and  predictions.  Therefore,  at  this  stage,  you  scan  the  data  set  for  any 
inconsistencies and you fix them then and there. 
Step 4: Exploratory Data Analysis 
Grab your detective glasses because this stage is all about diving deep into data and finding all 
the hidden data mysteries. EDA or Exploratory Data Analysis is the brainstorming stage of 
Machine Learning. Data Exploration involves understanding the patterns and trends in the data. 
At  this  stage,  all  the  useful  insights  are  drawn  and  correlations  between  the  variables  are 
understood. 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
For example, in the case of predicting rainfall, we know that there is a strong possibility of rain if 
the temperature has fallen low. Such correlations must be understood and mapped at this stage. 
Step 5: Building a Machine Learning Model 
All the insights and patterns derived during Data Exploration are used to build the Machine 
Learning Model. This stage always begins by splitting the data set into two parts, training data, 
and testing data. The training data will be used to build and analyze the model. The logic of the 
model is based on the Machine Learning Algorithm that is being implemented. 
In the case of predicting rainfall, since the output will be in the form of True (if it will rain 
tomorrow) or False (no rain tomorrow), we can use a Classification Algorithm such as Logistic 
Regression. 
Step 6: Model Evaluation & Optimization 
After building a model by using the training data set, it is finally time to put the model to a test. 
The testing data set is used to check the efficiency of the model and how accurately it can predict 
the outcome. Once the accuracy is calculated, any further improvements in the model can be 
implemented at this stage. Methods like parameter tuning and cross-validation can be used to 
improve the performance of the model. 
Step 7: Predictions 
Once the model is evaluated and improved, it is finally used to make predictions. The final 
output can be a Categorical variable (eg. True or False) or it can be a Continuous Quantity (eg. 
the predicted value of a stock). 
In our case, for predicting the occurrence of rainfall, the output will be a categorical variable. 
So that was the entire Machine Learning process. Now it’s time to learn about the different ways 
in which Machines can learn. 
 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
1.2 Uses (Applications) of Machine Learning 
The need for machine learning is increasing day by day. The reason behind the need for machine 
learning is that it is capable of doing tasks that are too complex for a person to implement 
directly. As a human, we have some limitations as we cannot access the huge amount of data 
manually, so for this, we need some computer systems and here comes the machine learning to 
make things easy for us. 
We can train machine learning algorithms by providing them the huge amount of data and let 
them explore the data, construct the models, and predict the required output automatically.  
1. Image Recognition: 
Image recognition is one of the most common applications of machine learning. It is used to 
identify objects, persons, places, digital images, etc. The popular use case of image recognition 
and face detection is, Automatic friend tagging suggestion: 
Facebook provides us a feature of auto friend tagging suggestion. Whenever we upload a photo 
with our Facebook friends, then we automatically get a tagging suggestion with name, and the 
technology behind this is machine learning's face detection and recognition algorithm. 
It  is  based  on  the  Facebook  project  named  "Deep  Face,"  which  is  responsible  for  face 
recognition and person identification in the picture. 
 
   Fig5: Machine Learning Applications 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
2. Speech Recognition 
While using Google, we get an option of "Search by voice," it comes under speech recognition, 
and it's a popular application of machine learning. 
Speech recognition is a process of converting voice instructions into text, and it is also known as 
"Speech to text", or "Computer speech recognition." At present, machine learning algorithms 
are widely used by various applications of speech recognition. Google assistant, Siri, Cortana, 
and Alexa are using speech recognition technology to follow the voice instructions. 
3. Traffic prediction: 
If we want to visit a new place, we take help of Google Maps, which shows us the correct path 
with the shortest route and predicts the traffic conditions. 
4.  Product recommendations: 
Machine learning  is  widely used  by  various  e-commerce and entertainment companies such 
as Amazon, Netflix, etc., for product recommendation to the user. Whenever we search for some 
product on Amazon, then we started getting an advertisement for the same product while internet 
surfing on the same browser and this is because of machine learning. Google understands the 
user interest using various machine learning algorithms and suggests the product as per customer 
interest.  
5. Self-driving cars: 
One of the most exciting applications of machine learning is self-driving cars. Machine learning 
plays a significant role in self-driving cars. Tesla, the most popular car manufacturing company 
is working on self-driving car. It is using unsupervised learning method to train the car models to 
detect people and objects while driving. 
6. Email Spam and Malware Filtering: 
Whenever we receive a new email, it is filtered automatically as important, normal, and spam. 
We always receive an important mail in our inbox with the important symbol and spam emails in 
our spam box, and the technology behind this is Machine learning. 

RKR21 IML II/I ALL BRANCHES 
 
7. Virtual Personal Assistant: 
We have various virtual personal assistants such as Google assistant, Alexa, Cortana, Siri. As 
the name suggests, they help us in finding the information using our voice instruction. These 
assistants can help us in various ways just by our voice instructions such as Play music, call 
someone, Open an email, Scheduling an appointment, etc. 
8. Online Fraud Detection: 
Machine learning is making our online transaction safe and secure by detecting fraud transaction. 
Whenever we perform some online transaction, there may be various ways that a fraudulent 
transaction can take place such as fake accounts, fake ids, and steal money in the middle of a 
transaction. So to detect this, Feed Forward Neural network helps us by checking whether it is 
a genuine transaction or a fraud transaction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 