

KMIT PS 2-2 2024 Projects List 
Pg 1
Project TitleProject Description
TechnologiesMentorRoomGroups
Link to Mentor's Project 
Description Video
Additonal CommentsAdditonal Material
LecturesCheck
Dune State University would like all their Professors to record the lectures and upload them to their 
Learning Management System so that the lectures are available for students to watch anytime. 
With each video a PDF file too is uploaded. The system needs to validate the video for topic wise 
coverage. It also needs to match the video content and PDF and show its analysis.
MERN LLMSireesha
B208
3
https://drive.google.
com/file/d/14aph2PRi4dXl2EZ9U
Ho62jtKJpxYkB3t/view?
usp=sharing
https://docs.google.
com/presentation/d/1G9PfSlYUBbAIP
ZTH_h33RD9UyM49Fvoa/edit?
usp=sharing&ouid=10399054717229
9399362&rtpof=true&sd=true
Saanjh Sahayak
Saanjh is the home for the elderly. The home needs help in tracking health records of the elderly 
and predicting any risk for diseases. Create an application that helps the Home to perform a clinical 
decision support system and disease risk prediction using an existing LLM model. 

MERN LLMSireesha
B208
2
https://drive.google.
com/file/d/1U85NLxvVMnc1VrCK
M3gTQBcFh73wHWC7/view?
usp=sharing
https://docs.google.
com/presentation/d/132gjva2-
aQmGCMrbHJSPtJmNELCnaKp6/edi
t?
usp=sharing&ouid=10399054717229
9399362&rtpof=true&sd=true
Chat-bot for 
Medical Queries
LLMs have numerous applications in healthcare domain. In scenarios where 
doctors may not be easily available, Gen AI models will be useful for addressing
 patient queries, at least for non-critical diseases. A pre-trained LLM model is a 
good candidate for developing a Medical Chat Doctor. It should be able to answer 
patient queries. To provide relevant answers and improve the quality of diagnosis, 
the model should be fine tuned with custom data. Choose an appropriate model 
(e.g. Mistral-7B) and search for training data set for fine tuning the model. 

The patient should be able input problems/symptoms he/she is facing and ask 
related questions.
An appropriate response should be given by the Chat-bot in a couple of sentences.

https://huggingface.co/datasets/lavita/ChatDoctor-HealthCareMagic-100K
Gen AI / LLM
Ashok 
Sharma
B202A
3https://youtu.be/K83ZYJJ6EkM
https://github.
com/brevdev/notebooks/blob/mai
n/mistral-finetune.ipynb


Insurance Quotes 
LLM
Design and develop a Language Model based system for Health Insurance domain.
A pretrained LLM will have to be integrated with a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) 
framework populated with Insurance data, for this purpose. The system 
should take as input health insurance parameters and 
output Quotes for Insurance.
Gen AI / LLM
Ashok 
Sharma
B202A
2https://youtu.be/HrZeBKkrtm0
https://medium.
com/@kanavanand8/solving-
insurance-doubts-using-the-rag-
model-with-llm-in-local-
911290fa9889
Agriculture 
Research LLM
Design and develop a Language Model based system that allows users to query 
reports/documents from ICAR - CRIDA website. For this purpose, either Fine Tune the LLM model 
with the given Agricultural data OR use a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) framework and 
populate it with this data. Start from a simple Prototype and incrementally add new features to the 
system e. g. begin with querying English documents followed by adding Hindi version.
LLM
Ashok 
Sharma
B202A
2https://youtu.be/fzT-HeO3--0 https://www.icar-crida.res.in
Cricket LLM
Cricket is a popular team sport can be played in various formats Test, (ODIs), and Twenty20 (T20) 
etc.Cricket is more than just a sport; it is a cultural phenomenon that unites people from diverse 
backgrounds and nations.To develop a specialized Large Language Model (LLM) tailored 
specifically for cricket-related text understanding and generation.Match Summaries and Reports,
Player Profiling and Analysis,Cricket News Aggregation,Historical Data Analysis and Insights with 
video references,Track records,analysis on player performance,Highlights of specific expertise of 
players, such as batting, bowling, or fielding prowess.Analyze player strategies,Provide historical 
comparisons between players and their achievements.
Identify emerging talents and rising stars in the cricketing world.Create profiles for legendary 
players, detailing their career milestones and achievements.Provide insights into team dynamics 
and player collaborations during matches.
Highlights of tense moments, dramatic comebacks, and last-minute victories.


LLMG Badrinath
B203
3
https://youtu.be/3AS1ZJwU1tYhttps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.
1145/3632754.3632757 https:
//github.com/Ankush-
Chander/cricket-ama/tree/main
Transport 
Services LLM

Driving Licence,Registration,permits,taxes,fees,Acts & Rules,Various Forms, procedures and 
supporting documents ,Manuals and guides for various services are avaiable.Most of the services 
are interdependent. For example obtaining permanent driving license is 2 step process such 
obtaining learing license, attending driving test and on qualifying for permenant license. Similary 
once the vailidy of licese is expiring it need to renewed. Many more services are offered by 
transport department. The Chatbot should be first point of contact to citizens which can provide 
interactive response with information processed using AI techniques. This component will utilize 
advanced natural language processing techniques to interpret user queries, extract relevant 
information from extensive datasets, and generate tailored responses in real-time. This solution will 
streamline the process of finding relevant details, reducing the time and effort required for users to 
obtain accurate information. Furthermore, the adaptability of LLMs enables continuous learning and 
refinement, ensuring that the chatbot remains updated and responsive to evolving user needs and 
regulatory changes.
LLMG Badrinath
B203
2
https://youtu.be/3AS1ZJwU1tY
https://transport.telangana.gov.in/

Registration 
Info LLM

The Registration Department manages a vast array of services critical to citizens, including 
property registration, stamp duty information, marriage registration, market value inquiries, and 
more. Documents to find the specific information they require  registration processes and 
regulations necessitates real-time updates and accurate responses to user queries.Therefore, the 
primary objective  is to develop a customized LLM component integrated into the Registration 
Department's service platform. The Chatbot should be first point of contact to citizens which can 
provide interactive response with information processed using AI techniques. This component will 
utilize advanced natural language processing techniques to interpret user queries, extract relevant 
information from extensive datasets, and generate tailored responses in real-time. This solution will 
streamline the process of finding relevant details, reducing the time and effort required for users to 
obtain accurate information. Furthermore, the adaptability of LLMs enables continuous learning and 
refinement, ensuring that the chatbot remains updated and responsive to evolving user needs and 
regulatory changes.

LLMG Badrinath
B203
2
https://youtu.be/RDMYpEgB2AYhttps://registration.telangana.gov.
in/  https://registration.ap.gov.
in/igrs
KMIT Drone 
Swarm
Develop an application for controlling the swarm in real-time with dynamic formations and different 
LED patterns.
Python, 
Dronekit, AI/ML
SAIKRISHNA
UTKARSH
2
https://youtu.be/lkL0-HECTgI?
si=32-YbDKl8U-4OFOg

KMIT PS 2-2 2024 Projects List 
Pg 2
Project TitleProject Description
TechnologiesMentorRoomGroups
Link to Mentor's Project 
Description Video
Additonal CommentsAdditonal Material
Intelligent AR 
avatar based 
smart chatbot 
Develop an application for scanning the head of a person using Kinect to create a model. Make the 
avatar talk in Omniverse. Integrate with a backend LLM for running queries.


C#,C++, 
Omniverse,
AI/ML
SAIKRISHNA
UTKARSH
2
https://youtu.be/vY1Wh1IqUBc?
si=qACGnFyyg8XHvd_JMixed Reality
PlantGuard: 
Smart Plant 
Monitoring
Develop an app that collects data from various sensors embedded in the environment, such as soil 
moisture sensors, light sensors, temperature sensors, and humidity sensors. These sensors 
continuously monitor the plant's surroundings and gather real-time data on environmental 
conditions.
Using the processed data and insights from the NLP analysis, PlantGuard provides intelligent 
feedback and recommendations to users regarding their plants' health and care. This feedback can 
include suggestions for watering schedules, optimal lighting conditions, temperature adjustments, 
and fertilization requirements.
C#,C++, AI/MLSAIKRISHNA
UTKARSH
2
https://youtu.be/GBEPViGkZzY?
si=MwxoxmL9qHd_h-7F
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2102.
00838v1.pdf
https://paperswithcode.
com/paper/fine-tuning-bert-
based-models-for-plant
Visitor 
Management 
System
Create a comprehensive visitor management system for residential complexes, office buildings, or 
any secured facility. The system will utilize face recognition for visitor authentication and number 
plate detection for vehicle tracking.
Python, MERN, 
AI/ML
SAIKRISHNA
UTKARSH
2
https://youtu.be/uWnRtQnAVR0?
si=viA_Amcfg4zJBV1j
GenAI powered 
Virtual Agent/IVR 
services
- In the era of GenAI/LLMs many customer service providers have started using AI powered solutions 
to handle customer issues efficiently
- This has enhanced the customer satisfaction with round the clock services availability and reduced 
turn-around-time in resolving customer issues
- IVR services are now AI powered to resolve customer issues
- This is highly scalable and efficient application of GenAI in customer services domain

Requirements/Features of the project:
1. Mimic IVR call service using WebRTC
2. The call should be handled by LLM powered virtual agent
3. The domain of customer service can be - hospitality, e-commerce or any domain of the team's 
choice
4. LLM must be fine-tuned to answer the queries of customers pertaining to the domain chosen by the 
team. For instance, the standard queries in hospitality and e-commerce domain will be different, so 
the LLM must be fine tuned accordingly
LLM, 
WebRTC
Sripooja
B206
2
https://youtu.be/-
9UlNf0Cuqg
Power Up Phone 
Experiences with 
Conversational IVR - 
YouTube
Visual Aid for 
visually impaired
- Use VLM pre-trained models to convert an image or video to text in order to describe the 
surroundings to a person suffering from visual impairment
- Helps to keep a record of surrounding activities for a user who is visually challenged. A care taker 
can view the history of surrounding activities if needed
- Some scenarios
        1. Describe colors/objects in a scene to a person who is partially blind
        2. Raise an alarm in case of hazardous surroundings
        3. Conversational bot to describe surroundings to a person suffering from visual impairment

Requirements/Features of the project:
1. A mobile app should capture picture or video and process it using VLM (scene-to-text)
2. Once the input picture or video is processed, the app should be able to assist the user in answering 
her/his queries related to the surroundings
3. The app should raise an alarm in case of hazardous surroundings
4. The app should keep a log of the conversation with the user
VLM (Computer 
Vision),  Flutter
Sripooja
B206
3
https://youtu.
be/6x2pxbNTYNo
New AI tool describes 
surroundings to visually 
impaired people - YouTube
Text/Video 
summarizer
- With so many useful videos and blogs available for free on any topic, on the internet, it becomes 
difficult to summarize from all that information manually
- A tool which can take documents or video links of your choice as input and generate a summary of 
various topics will be quite handy
- Some scenarios
        1. Generate quick reference notes from a list of documents, videos to prepare for an exam
        2. Generate list of highlights from an interview/documentary video input

Requirements/Features of the project:
1. The app must support content from various sources like - documents, video, links to blogs/videos 
etc.
2. For a single request the summary must be generated immediately and displayed to the user
3. App must also work in the background, i.e., if a user provides a youtube channel as source then the 
app must look for latest video uploads on that youtube channel
4. Whenever a new video is uploaded on that youtube channel the summarization workflow must get 
triggered and summary must be sent to the user in the form of a PUSH NOTIFICATION
LLaMa2 or GPT,
LangChain, 
Streamlit or 
Flutter
Sripooja
B206
3
https://youtu.be/X-
sRZTA6plc
Text Summarization Llama2: 
how to Use LLama2 with 
Langchain - YouTube
Medical_ImgCap

Medical imaging is indispensable in the current diagnostic workflows. Out of the plethora of existing 
imaging modalities, X-ray remains one of the most widely-used visualization methods in many 
hospitals around the world.Many healthcare systems outsource the medical image analysis task. This 
MERN _LLM app aims to  generate Medical Image Captioning on Chest X-Rays  using LLM.This 
project can assist and accelerate the diagnosis process of the radiologists.
LLM,MERN
Dr.Devika
UDAAN
2
medical_imageCAP (2).mp4
LLM_stethoscope 

The stethoscope has been considered as an invaluable diagnostic tool.Recent electronic 
stethoscopes have rendered lung sounds recordable, 
and it facilitated the studies of automatically analyzing lung sounds.This Flutter_LLM app 
automatically analyze and classify the respiratory  disease sounds using LLM.
         LLM,
Flutter/Firebase
Dr.Devika
UDAAN
2
llm_stet.mp4

KMIT PS 2-2 2024 Projects List 
Pg 3
Project TitleProject Description
TechnologiesMentorRoomGroups
Link to Mentor's Project 
Description Video
Additonal CommentsAdditonal Material
VR_Medical_LLM

Medical ultrasound (US) imaging has become a prominent modality for breast cancer imaging due 
to its ease-of-use, low-cost and safety.  US imaging has shown great potential in automated
breast cancer detection.This unreal_MERN app identifies breast cancer on Ultrasound images 
using LLM.
        LLM,
  Unreal,MERN
Dr.Devika
UDAAN
2
VR_Medical_LLM (1).mp4

Generative_Neur
ologist

Brain tumor segmentation is an important task in medical image processing. Early diagnosis of 
brain tumors plays an important role in improving treatment possibilities and increases 
the survival rate of the patients.The purpose of this MERN_LLM_app is to provide MRI-based brain 
tumor segmentation using LLM.
LLM,MERNDr.Devika
UDAAN
2
gen_neuro.mp4
PsephologistLL
M
Psephology is the study of elections, voting patterns, and political trends. A psephologist 
analyzes data from polls, election results, and surveys to understand how and why people 
vote the way they do, as well as to predict future voting outcomes. Role of LLM in 
Analyzing Election Data
Data Analysis: LLMs can process vast amounts of data from previous elections to identify 
trends, voter behavior, and constituency-wise performance of political parties.
Sentiment Analysis: By analyzing social media, news articles, and public forums, LLMs 
can gauge public sentiment towards political parties, candidates, and election issues.
Predictive Modelling: Although predictive modeling for election outcomes is challenging 
and fraught with uncertainties, 
LLM,MERNGnanesh
B2042
https://levelup.gitconnected.
com/automating-youtube-script-
writing-with-langchain-and-streamlit-
a-step-by-step-guide-9786ebaec6be
Retail LLM
leveraging LLM technology in retail operations can lead to a more seamless and 
personalized shopping experience for customers, empower salespersons with actionable 
insights, and provide mart owners with valuable tools for financial analysis and decision-
making across their branches 1. Customer Experience Enhancement
Improved Search Capabilities: LLM-powered search functionalities can understand natural 
language queries, enabling customers to find products more intuitively and efficiently.
Personalized Product Recommendations: By analyzing customer browsing and purchasing 
history, LLMs can provide tailored product recommendations, enhancing the likelihood of 
conversion and customer satisfaction.
2. Salesperson Support
Product Availability and Sales Trends: LLMs can analyze sales data across various 
branches or locations in real-time, providing insights into product availability and 
identifying trends where certain products may be underperforming. Salespersons can 
leverage this information to adjust their sales strategies accordingly.
Sales Performance Analysis: LLMs can analyze sales data to identify patterns and factors 
influencing the progression of certain product sales. This analysis can help salespersons 
understand customer preferences and adjust their approach to promote these products 
effectively.
3. Financial Analysis for Mart Owners
Branch Performance Summary: LLMs can consolidate data from multiple branches to 
provide mart owners with a comprehensive summary of financial performance. This 
includes metrics such as sales revenue, profit margins, and inventory turnover rates, 
allowing owners to identify areas for improvement and make informed business decisions.
LLM,MERNGnanesh
B2043
https://www.linkedin.
com/pulse/trendsgpt-how-set-up-
ai-agent-automated-data-
analysis-yeddula-ewjsf/
https://www.google.com/search?
q=Building+a+data+analyst+agent&o
q=Building+a+data+analyst+agent&g
s_lcrp=EgZjaHJvbWUyBggAEEUYOd
IBBzg5NWowajeoAgCwAgA&sourcei
d=chrome&ie=UTF-8#ip=1
IPL LLM
LLMs can automatically generate detailed and engaging match summaries, player 
performance reports, and analyses of key moments in games. This can be particularly 
useful for sports journalism, blogs, and content creators looking to publish comprehensive 
coverage of IPL matches LLMs can power chatbots and virtual assistants on websites, 
social media platforms, and apps dedicated to the IPL. These AI-driven tools can answer 
fan queries in real-time, discuss player statistics, historical match outcomes, and even 
provide play-by-play updates during live matches. Virtual Commentators and Narrators
For live streaming or creating recap videos of matches, LLMs can be used to script 
commentary that highlights key moments, provides statistical insights, or adds historical 
context to the performances seen on the field.
LLM, MERNGnanesh
B204
2
https://www.geeksforgeeks.
org/ipl-2023-data-analysis-using-
pandas-ai/

KMIT PS 2-2 2024 Projects List 
Pg 4
Project TitleProject Description
TechnologiesMentorRoomGroups
Link to Mentor's Project 
Description Video
Additonal CommentsAdditonal Material
Chat with Author            
/TextBook
An Agent Helps to Automated chat with Author while Providing the Query provides acuraccy results. 
we'll create an application that enables you to ask questions about Selected Authors Textbook(PDFs) 
and receive accurate answers.

Train GPT on PDF documents and fine-tune it to your specific use case. 
Experience the seamless user interface as you upload PDFs, ask questions, 
and receive prompt answers from the LLM.

Prerequisites: (an open-source Python,Javascript, Flask framework, Basics on OpenAI)
Discover Langchain's capabilities in training GPT models on your data and generating personalized LLMs. 
Explore text embeddings and their integration with Langchain using OpenAI's API.
Automate tasks and improve efficiency using Langchain with Streamlit.

Outcome:
You'II get Q&A on given topic
You'll learn how to use LangChain (a framework that makes it easier to assemble the components to build a chatbot)  &
Pinecone - a 'vectorstore' to store your documents in number 'vectors'. 
You'll also learn how to create a frontend chat interface to display the results alongside source documents. 
LLM, MERNShanker
B205
2
https://colab.research.google.
com/drive/1Fk9um3Af_aV0WvavD01
gVljPHAxzQNLp?
usp=sharing#scrollTo=3igYiWjISjvS
Fitness Guru LLM
An Agent for Automated Planning and Excerciese Program Building
1. We dive deep into the world of automated planning for your workout routines using 
advanced AI agents. Whether you're short on time, need specific workout plans, or
 just want to incorporate cutting-edge technology into your fitness regime.
2. We explore how to leverage large language models and LinkChain to personalize 
your exercise routine

Step-by -Step Process:
Research has used generative AI to develop a digital fitness coach that improves upon 
existing solutions in terms of accuracy and realism. The fitness coach provides 
real-time interaction by encouraging, correcting,  and helping the user meet their 
fitness goals. 

A video stream of the user exercising is processed by our action recognition model. 
Based on the recognized action, our stateful orchestrator grounds the prompt and feeds it to the 
LLM. 
The fitness coach provides the LLM answer back to the user through a text-to-speech avatar. 
This is made possible thanks to three key innovations: a vision model that is trained to 
detect fine-grained fitness activities, a language model that is trained to generate 
language grounded in the visual concepts, and an orchestrator 
that coordinates the fluid interaction between these two modalities to facilitate live 
dialogue coaching feedback. 

The result is a fitness coach that provides real-time interaction for an engaging and dynamic user 
experience. 
LLM, AIShanker
B205
2
Fitness coaching using an LLM 
grounded in real time vision - 
YouTube
https://colab.research.google.
com/drive/1-
KfH5yE0EpI10_OW1upzn-
nfPXRPV_7X?usp=sharing
Blockchain LLM
In this LLM Project, We will Provide a research paper link (IEEE/SCOPOUS/SPRINGER/WEB OF 
SCIENCE), 
By using Webscrape extract research paper data including references link in those papers.
Now train that data Model in the Form of Q&A Formate.
When the User interacted with Agent on any query related to paper, it as Prompt the required data 
& Produce the Summarization of paper including Math Formulas aso.

Prerequesties:   
In this LLM project, we will use langchain, openai API, and streamlit to build a new research tool 
that can be used by equity research analysts to conduct their research.

Technolgy Uses: ChatGPT, SERP API, Langchain, React,Webscrape

Outcome:
Summarization of Research Paper
LLM, MERNShanker
B205
2
LLM Finetune dataset for Crypto 
and Blockchain

https://www.kaggle.
com/datasets/amalrajsingh/crypto
currency-blockchain-and-stock-
market-qa
https://www.kaggle.
com/datasets/adilbhatti/bitcoin-and-
stock-exchanges
RecipeRealm
Most often, we get into a situation when we want to cook something delicious, however, we are 
short on ingredients at our home. It also creates a lot of confusion about what to cook with the 
available ingredients. Further, we might not have accessibility to more ingredients from the nearby 
market due to various reasons like non-availability.

In such a situation we keep on searching for recipes that match our ingredients online, but hardly 
get any results and that too takes a lot of time, and ultimately we return to our kitchen disappointed. 
There’s a need for a system that could actually take ingredients as the input and give us the list of 
most matching recipes that could help us make delicious food at our homes.

Our project aims to make a user aware of the various dishes which can be cooked from the 
available set of ingredients being input by a user.
Scrapping Module - Scraping the dataset for ingredients, recipes, etc. 
Training Model - Fetching the data and display the output based on the input.
Developing UI - Developing a user-friendly UI to present the recipes based on the user inputs
LLM,MERN
Pooja G & 
Seshu
B202B
2

KMIT PS 2-2 2024 Projects List 
Pg 5
Project TitleProject Description
TechnologiesMentorRoomGroups
Link to Mentor's Project 
Description Video
Additonal CommentsAdditonal Material
Trip Planner
Your Intelligent Travel Companion

The role of artificial intelligence within the business world has increased dramatically over the past 
decade, and the last few years, in particular, have seen much more widespread adoption in the 
travel industry. 

The aim of the project is to develop a smart travel assistant, helping you plan amazing trips 
effortlessly. It's like having a knowledgeable friend who knows all the best places to visit and stay, 
tailored just for you!
LLM,MERN
Pooja G & 
Seshu
B202B
2